How Family Planning
Methods Work
Le fonctionnement des méthodes de planification
familiale
English Health
How Family Planning Methods Work
Le fonctionnement des méthodes de
planification familiale
English
Kenya
Copyright © 2019, Christian Connections for International Health
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
You are free to make commercial use of this work. You may adapt and add
to this work. You must keep the copyright and credits for authors,
illustrators, etc.
Adapté de l’original, Copyright © 2017, Institute for Reproductive
Health at Georgetown University. Sous licence CC BY 4.0.
Cette brochure est une adaptation d’un manuel présentant
plusieurs méthodes contraceptives. Il était conçu, à l’origine, par
l’Institute for Reproductive Health de Georgetown University
pour être utilisé dans le cadre du projet Advancing Partners and
Community. 
L’illustration de la couverture est de Jean-Marie Boayaga, ©2009
SIL International, d’International Illustrations : The Art of
Reading 3.0, sous licence CC-BY-ND.
L’illustration de la page 21 est de Bruce Blaus, © 2016 Bruce
Blaus. CC-BY-SA 4.0.
Les illustrations de la page 23 sont de Mark Beisser, © 2007 Johns
Hopkins Center for Communication Programs], avec la permission
de Photoshare. CC-BY-NC 4.0. Pour utilisation uniquement dans
les publications sur la santé.
Toutes les autres illustrations sont sous © Institute for
Reproductive Health de la Georgetown University.
La partie sur la contraception d’urgence est une adaptation de
FHI360. 2013. Durham, North Carolina: FHI360/Communication
for Change Project. "Facts for Family Planning".
Les versets bibliques sont tirés de la Bible du Semeur®, Copyright
©1992, 1999, 2015 par Biblica, Inc.® Utilisée avec permission.
Tous droits réservés. Obtenus surwww.biblegateway.com
1
Table of Contents
Introduction 2
Breastfeeding method 6
Pill 8
Injectable 10
Implant 12
Moon Beads or CycleBeads® 14
TwoDay Method® 16
Male Condom 18
Female Condom
IUD Intra-Uterine Device
20
22
Tubal Ligation 24
Vasectomy 26
Morning-after Pill or Emergency Contraceptive
Pill
28
2
Introduction
What is family planning?
Family planning is when people decide for themselves
the number of children they want to have and how
long to wait before becoming pregnant again. Family
planning involves people using methods to prevent
pregnancy, but it does not include abortion. Family
planning should always be voluntary, that is, no one
should tell people they must use family planning or
which method they must use. The methods they
choose should be consistent with what they value and
believe.
In some areas family planning is called ‘healthy timing
and spacing of pregnancies' (HTSP). This is because it
helps you choose when to get pregnant and know how
to avoid pregnancy if you do not wish to get pregnant.
Why is family planning important?
Planning how many children you want to have and
when to have them benefits your baby, mother, and
family. When a pregnancy is planned, a baby is more
likely to be born healthy, to breastfeed for a longer
time and grow well. A mother is able to regain her
strength before getting pregnant again. Also, she will
have more time for the baby and to care for her family.
The family will have more resources for food, clothing,
housing and education.
Mothers and babies will be more healthy if women
(and girls) wait until they are 18 years old to get
pregnant and have their children before age 35. They
should wait 2 years after a birth/delivering a baby
before trying to get pregnant again. Child deaths and
stunting are lower when a woman waits at least two
years after giving birth before trying to get pregnant
again. It is also best to wait 6 months after a
miscarriage or abortion to get pregnant again.
Adequate birth spacing improves mothers’ and
children’s health.
What this book is about
This book provides simple information on 12 methods
for healthy timing and spacing of pregnancies, how
each method works and what you can expect. Think
carefully about the information concerning each
method and talk to your spouse/partner about it if
possible.
Multiple family planning options are important so a
woman can choose the one that works best for her
body and at this point in her life. For example, she
should consider if she wants to space her pregnancies
or if she is done having children. A woman can begin
using a different method in consultation with her
health provider if she is reasonably sure she is not
pregnant. This is true even if she is already using
another method. Each method has advantages and
disadvantages, so talk to a health worker to get advice
on which method might be best for you. This is
particularly important if either of you is HIV positive.
3
Effectiveness
All of the methods discussed in this book will help you
avoid becoming pregnant, but some methods do a
better job of that than others. You should choose the
one that is best for you. The most effective methods
are:
     IUD, Tubal Ligation, Vasectomy
It would be very rare for someone using these
methods to get pregnant.
The following methods are not quite as effective as the
ones listed above:
      Injectables, Breastfeeding Method, Pills
Sometimes women using these methods still get
pregnant, but it doesn't happen very often
.
 if used
correctly
The following methods are less effective than all those
listed above:
     Male condom, Female condom
     Moon Beads or CycleBeads®, TwoDay Method®
These methods have to be used very carefully to
prevent you from becoming pregnant.
If used consistently and correctly, it is generally not
necessary to use a second method.  If you feel you are
at risk of a sexually transmitted infection (STI),
including HIV, you should use a condom (male or
female) to help protect against STIs.
Remember: You can choose the method that suits you.
4
What the Bible says
Healthy timing and spacing of pregnancies (HTSP), or
family planning as it is commonly known, is one way of
showing care for the mother and therefore the whole
family. When mother or child is suffering, the whole
family will suffer. “If one part suffers, every part
suffers with it.” 1 Corinthians 12:26a. Therefore,
caring for one person in the family means we are
actually showing care for the whole family and the
entire body of Christ.
God expects us to be responsible for taking care of our
families. That means that the number of children we
plan to have should be that which we can care for,
provide for and educate. “Anyone who does not
provide for their relatives, and especially their own
household, has denied the faith and is worse than an
unbeliever.” 1 Timothy 5:8
“God blessed them and said to them, 'Be fruitful and
increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it.'"
Genesis 1:28This does not mean that each couple is
responsible for filling the earth with children. It is a
collective responsibility. God commanded Adam and
Eve to take charge of His creation responsibly. One
way of exercising this responsibility in family life is to
use HTSP (healthy timing and spacing) for the benefit
and health of the mother, the baby and the whole
family.
Note that family planning is also valued within Islam
and other religons.
5
6
Breastfeeding Method
How it works
The Breastfeeding Method, also known as Lactational
Amenorrhea Method (LAM), prevents pregnancy if you
feed your baby entirely on breast milk, you breastfeed
your baby regularly, day and night, and if you meet
ALL 3 of these conditions (see the illustrations on the
next page):
1. You have had no menstrual bleeding since your baby
was born.
2. You feed your baby only on breast milk and do not
give the baby any other food or liquid.
3. Your baby is less than 6 months old.
LAM works because breastfeeding temporarily
prevents a woman's body from releasing an egg.
What to expect
Women can expect no monthly bleeding while
breastfeeding. This can go on for several months after
having a baby. A woman can use breastfeeding for
family planning up to 6 months after she gives birth.
She should plan on starting another method if she has
menstrual bleeding, gives her baby any other food or
liquid, or her baby is more than 6 months old.
7
Breastfeeding Method
8
Pill
How it works
The woman takes a pill every day. The pill stops the
woman from producing an egg, so even if sperm are in
her reproductive system, there is no egg to fertilize.
The standard pill is used for women who are not
breastfeeding. There is another type of pill that can be
used during breastfeeding.
What to expect
1. Some women experience irregular bleeding with
some cramping at first, which is normal, safe and
common.
2. Some women experience stomach upset or mild
headaches that go away after the first few months.
You must remember to take the pill at the same time
every day. If you forget a pill, you should take it as
soon as you remember. You can take up to 2 pills in 1
day or at the same time.
9
Pill
10
Injectable
How it works
An “injectable” is a hormone that is injected into the
woman to prevent the release of an egg and is highly
effective. After the first injection, the woman will need
to have another injection every 3 months. In some
places, both one month and two month injections may
be available.
What to expect
A woman must get an injection every 3 months.
She may experience:
1. Irregular bleeding at first, then spotting or no
monthly bleeding, but this is common and safe; and
2. Possible slight weight change.
 After stopping injections, it can take several
months to become pregnant.
Note:
11
Injectable
12
Implant
How it works
A health worker inserts a small capsule under the skin
of the inner, upper arm using an implant. This protects
a woman from getting pregnant for 3 to 5 years,
depending on the type of implant. An implant works by
preventing sperm from reaching the egg and by
preventing the release of the egg. It can be removed
at any time when you want to get pregnant.
What to expect
Irregular bleeding, spotting, heavier bleeding or no
monthly bleeding may occur; this is normal, safe and
common.
13
Implant
14
Moon Beads or CycleBeads®
How it works
A woman uses a set of strung coloured beads known as
Moon Beads to help her know the days of the month on
which she is fertile and therefore more likely to get
pregnant. Moon Beads can be used by most women
who have regular menstrual cycles between 26 and 32
days long.
To prevent a pregnancy, the couple either uses
condoms or abstains from sex on the woman's fertile
(white beads) days.
What to expect
Using Moon Beads has no side effects. On fertile days
couples must use condoms or abstain from sex to
avoid a pregnancy.
15
Moon Beads or CycleBeads®
Brown beads:
Pregnancy is very unlikely
White beads:
Pregnancy is most likely
Red Bead
White Beads Brown Beads
Dark brown
bead:
Tells you if your cycle is
shorter than 26 days
Red bead:
First day of your period,
when you start to move the
 from bead to
bead daily
rubber ring
16
TwoDay Method®
How it works
A woman checks for secretions daily. If she has
secretions today and yesterday she is considered
fertile and likely to get pregnant today. She is not
fertile when she has two consecutive days without
secretions. To prevent pregnancy, couples use
condoms or abstain from sex on fertile days.
What to expect
The TwoDay Method has no side effects. Couples must
agree and be able to use condoms or abstain from sex
on fertile days to avoid a pregnancy.
17
TwoDay Method®
This illustration shows a woman who has checked for
secretions and has some on her two fingers.
18
Male Condom
How it works
A male condom covers the man’s penis during sex and
stops the sperm from entering the woman’s
reproductive system. It also helps protect from
sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS.
What to expect
It is important to use the condom correctly and
consistently every time you have sex.
19
Male Condom
20
Female Condom
How it works
A female condom is placed inside the woman’s vagina
to stop sperm from entering her reproductive system.
It also helps protect from sexually transmitted
infections, including HIV/AIDS.
What to expect
It is important to use the condom correctly and
consistently every time you have sex.
 Make sure the penis enters inside the condom
ring and stays in all through the course of having sex.
Note:
21
Female Condom
22
IUD - Intra-Uterine Device
How it works
The IUD is inserted in the woman. The most common
IUDs contain copper and they work by preventing
sperm from reaching the egg. It can be used for up to
12 years and can be removed any time a woman wants
to get pregnant. It can be inserted right after
childbirth as well as at other times.
What to expect
In the first few months of use the woman may
experience some cramping and heavier bleeding during
monthly periods.
23
IUD
24
Tubal Ligation
How it works
Tubal ligation is the cutting or blocking of the fallopian
tubes that carry the egg in a woman’s body. The
uterus is not removed. This procedure can be
performed right after childbirth or at other times.
Tubal ligation is safe and permanent. It is for women
or couples who no longer want more children.
What to expect
A woman will never be able to become pregnant again
following this surgery.
After a tubal ligation, some women may have soreness
for a few days. Monthly bleeding will continue as
usual. If the woman experiences other symptoms she
should seek medical care.
25
Tubal Ligation
The arrows show where the fallopian tubes that carry
the egg in a woman’s body are cut or blocked.
26
Vasectomy
How it works
Vasectomy involves cutting or blocking the tubes that
carry sperm in a man’s body. The testicles are not
removed.
Vasectomy is a safe and permanent method for men or
couples who no longer want more children.
What to expect
Vasectomy does not decrease sex drive, erection or
ejaculation. After a vasectomy, a man must use a
condom or another form of family planning to avoid
pregnancy for the first 3 months after the operation.
The man will not be able to father a child following this
surgery.
27
Vasectomy
The arrow shows where the the tubes that carry sperm
in a man’s body are cut or blocked.
28
Morning-after Pill
or Emergency Contraceptive
Pill (ECP)
How it works
The morning-after pill can help prevent pregnancy if a
woman takes it within 5 days of having unprotected
sex. The sooner she takes the pill, the more effective it
is. It should not be used instead of a regular method
of family planning, because a woman can get pregnant
right away. She should consider starting a regular
method immediately. Emergency Contraceptive Pills do
not cause abortion.
What to expect
Some women may have headaches or feel nauseous or
vomit, but only for a few days.
 Taking this pill cannot prevent pregnancy if a
couple has unprotected sex afterwards.
Note:
29
Morning-after Pill
or Emergency Contraceptive
A woman should take this pill with a glass of water Pill (ECP)
within five days of unprotected sex.